# Abstract

## Designing a Bangla Stemmer using rule based approach
Stemming is a preprocessing task for natural language processing that involves normalizing inflected words representing the same concept of the original word. Steaming is a process of text normalization that has many applications. There are many techniques for steaming of inflected words for different languages but very few works for Bangla word steaming. Therefore, stemming Bangla word is a unsolved problem. There are many different situations that can occur in Bangla language for word steaming. In this paper, we present a rule based algorithm to stem Bangla words. We developed the rules for infection detection for verb inflection, number inflection, and others. Using our rules, we developed a system to find the root word of Bangla words and found good performance. Sufficient examples are provided to explain the proposed system.

## Gold Dataset for the Evaluation of Bangla Stemmer
Stemming is a preprocessing task for Natural Language Processing(NLP) that involves normalizing inflected words representing the same concept of the original word. Steaming is a process of text normalization that transforms a slated word into its root form. It has a great impact in different applications in NLP and Natural Language Understanding. One of the biggest challenges in Bangla stemming is to collect the rules that are associated with Bangla word stemming and standard dataset for testing the accuracy. This paper presents a summery of rules associated with Bangla stemming and a gold standard dataset corpus which will helps to testify the stemming algorithm. We verify the rules and using our rules and corpus we tested with existing Bangla stemming algorithms and found that the proposed corpus makes a difference with existing techniques.

## Human Abnormal Behavior Detection Using Convolution Neural Network
When a behavior is regarded as unusual in particular circumstances, it is termed abnormal. The term "abnormal behavior" has many definitions depending on the situation. People sprinting in a field, for example, is regarded natural, but it appears weird if it occurs in a mall. Similarly, loitering in alleyways, arguing, or pushing each other in public places are all regarded weird in certain situations. Deep learning has been widely used in the computer vision sector in recent years, with considerable success in human activity recognition. The proposed technique helps in the detection of abnormal behavior under a variety of contexts, including background changes, the number of subjects (one, two people, or a crowd), and a variety of unusual human behaviors.

## BanglaGPT: A Generative Pretrained Transformer-based Model for Bangla Language
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has entered a new era with the advent of pre-trained language models, paving the way for constructing robust language models. Pretrained transformer-based models such as GPT-2 have become prevalent due to their cutting-edge efficiency. However, these approaches rely heavily on resource-intensive languages, forcing other languages to adopt multilingual frameworks (mGPT). The mGPT model could perform better for low-resource languages such as Bangla because the model has been trained on a diverse dataset spanning multiple languages. Recent studies show that the language-specific GPT model outperforms the multilingual mGPT model. In this research, we have proposed a pretrained monolingual GPT model called  BanglaGPT using the objective of causal language modeling (CLM). Due to the lack of available large datasets for NLP tasks in Bangla, we have created a Bangla language model dataset called BanglaCLM using a 26.24 GB Bangla corpus scraped from several public websites. We have used a subword-based tokenization algorithm named Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) for Bangla and finally trained the Bangla-GPT2 model from scratch using the BanglaCLM dataset. Our pretrained BanglaGPT provides state-of-the-art performance for Bangla text generation with a perplexity score of 2.86 and a loss score of 0.45 on the test set.

## Towards Developing a Transformer-based Bangla Typing Error Correction Model: A Deep Learning-based Approach
Despite being the sixth most widely spoken language globally, the Bangla language faces a lack of effective and efficient automated methods to correct keyboard errors in written text. Such errors can result in communication misunderstandings and misinterpretations, particularly in the digital domain, where written text plays a crucial role in communication and is heavily relied upon. However, no keyboard error model for the Bangla language has been found due to the lack of available datasets. In this research work, we have proposed a probabilistic approach to generate a synthetic Bangla keyboard typing error correction (BKTEC) dataset. By utilizing the novel BKTEC dataset, we have fine-tuned a transformer-based model for Keyboard error correction. After training it to convergence, the proposed model was tested on a test dataset, and we discovered a word level accuracy of 88.56%.

## A Novel Technique for Classification of Motor Imagery EEG Signal Based on Deep Learning Approaches
Motor imagery classification is an important area of research that aims to provide insights into the neural processes underlying motor control. By analyzing the patterns of brain activity related to imagined movement, researchers can better understand how the brain originates and controls voluntary movements. This knowledge can have significant implications for the development of novel therapies for neurological diseases that impact motor performance, such as stroke and Parkinson's disease. In this study, the performance of three deep learning methods, including Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM), were evaluated for the classification of motor imagery EEG data. The results of the study showed that DNNs and Bi-LSTM performed better than the other algorithms with Bi-LSTM obtaining the highest average accuracy 96.84%, sensitivity  95%, specificity 98.72%, F1-score 96.80%. This finding highlights the potential of these methods for EEG-based BCI applications. Moreover, a detailed comparison of several deep learning methods for the classification of motor imagery was presented, providing useful insights for future research toward the development of efficient and accurate BCIs. In conclusion, this study demonstrated the effectiveness of DNNs and Bi-LSTM for the classification of motor imagery EEG data and their potential for use in the development of BCIs for neurological diseases. These findings can guide future research in the field and contribute to the development of more efficient and accurate BCIs.

## A Deep Learning Approach for Non-Invasive Hypertension Classification from PPG Signal
Hypertension or high blood pressure is the leading risk factor  with the largest contribution to the burden of disease and mortality. Therefore, regular blood pressure (BP) checks are necessary to track hypertension and reduce risk. In light of this, we have proposed a noninvasive method for hypertension detection based on photoplethysmography (PPG) signals using deep learning techniques. A hybrid deep learning model consisting of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is introduced. First, PPG signals were acquired from 219 subjects, which underwent pre-processing steps. Then, hypertension was detected with satisfactory results by using our proposed model. Here, CNN is used to extract features in order to work better in classification tasks. Our proposed model constructed with CNN and GRU achieved an Accuracy of 85.00 %, Recall of 84.44 %, Precision of 87.77% and F1-score of 86.08\%. Our goal is to improve the medical industry by precisely detecting hypertension.
